Add "Custom Data Components" page to Item section (#144)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/items/custom-data-components.md

---
title: Custom Data Components
description: Learn how to add custom data to your items using the new 1.21 component system.
authors:
  - Romejanic
---

# Custom Data Components {#custom-data-components}

> As your items grow more complex, you may find yourself needing to store custom data associated with your item. The game allows you to store persistent data within an `ItemStack`, and as of 1.21 the way we do that is by using **Data Components**.

Reviewer: This was introduced in 1.20.5, not 1.21. Not sure how relevant it is anyway.

Author: My bad, I thought they were added in 1.21

Data Components replace NBT data from previous versions with structured data types (i.e. components) which can be applied to an `ItemStack` to store persistent data about that stack. Data components are namespaced, meaning we can implement our own data components to store custom data about an `ItemStack` and access it later. A full list of the vanilla data components can be found on this [Minecraft wiki page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Data_component_format#List_of_components).

Along with registering custom components, this page covers the general usage of the components API which also applies to vanilla components. You can see and access the definitions of all vanilla components in the `DataComponentTypes` class.

## Registering a Component {#registering-a-component}

As with anything else in your mod you will need to register your custom component using a `ComponentType`. This component type takes a generic argument containing the type of your component's value. We will be focusing on this in more detail further down.

> Choose a sensible class to place this in (e.g. your `ModItems` class from [Creating Your First Item](./first-item.md)), and add the following lines.

Reviewer: I usually put components in their own class, and I think that's resonable to suggest here too.

```java

> public static final ComponentType<?> MY_COMPONENT_TYPE = Registry.register(

Reviewer 2: This will need to be put into the reference mod, along with other code blocks.

Author: Yep, working on implementing his comments and adding to the reference mod. Thanks

    Registries.DATA_COMPONENT_TYPE,
    Identifier.of(FabricDocsReference.MOD_ID, "my_component"),
    ComponentType.<?>builder().codec(null).build()
);
```

There's a few things here worth noting. On the first and fourth lines you can see a `?`. This will be replaced with the type of your component's value. We'll fill this in soon.

Secondly, similar to registering a block or item you must provide an `Identifier` containing the intended ID of your component. This is namespaced with your mod's mod ID.

Lastly we have a `ComponentType.Builder` which creates the actual `ComponentType` instance which is being registered. This contains another cruical detail we will need to discuss which is your component's `Codec`. This is currently `null` but we will also fill it in soon.

## Basic Data Components {#basic-data-components}

Basic data components (e.g. `minecraft:damage`) consist of a single data value, such as an `int`, `float`, `boolean` or `String`.

> As an example, let's create an Integer value which will track how many times the player has right-clicked while holding our item. Let's update our component registration to the following:

Reviewer: nit: `Integer` should be a code block

}
```

Don't forget to update your lang file (`/assets/<mod id>/lang/en_us.json`) and add this line:

```json
{
    "item.modid.lightning_stick.used": "Used %1$s times"
}
```

If you start the game and hover over the item you gave yourself earlier, you should see the count displayed as a tooltip!

![Tooltip showing "Used 5 times"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_1.png)

However, if you give yourself a new Lightning Stick item *without* the custom component, the game will crash when you hover over the item in your inventory. You should see an error like this in the crash report:

```
java.lang.NullPointerException: Cannot invoke "java.lang.Integer.intValue()" because the return value of "net.minecraft.item.ItemStack.get(net.minecraft.component.ComponentType)" is null
        at com.example.LightningStick.appendTooltip(LightningStick.java:45)
        at net.minecraft.item.ItemStack.getTooltip(ItemStack.java:767)
```

As expected, since the `ItemStack` doesn't currently contain an instance of our custom component, calling `stack.get()` with our component type will return `null`. 

> There are two solutions we can use to address this problem:

Reviewer: There's another solution: properly handling the absense of the component (by hiding the tooltip)

Author: Sure, I'll suggest it as an alternative

### Setting a default component value {#setting-default-value}

> When you register your item and pass a `Item.Settings` object to your item constructor, you can also provide a list of default components which are applied to all new items. If we go back to our `ModItems` class to where we register the Lightning Stick item, we can add a default value for our custom component.

Reviewer: This is not a proper solution, because commands can remove default components. We should probably cover default components, but it's not a solution here.

Author: Got it, I'll add a note about that

    // spawn lightning
    ...

    // Update the click count
    ItemStack stack = user.getStackInHand(hand);
    int clickCount = stack.getOrDefault(ModItems.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT, 0);
    stack.set(ModItems.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT, ++clickCount);

    return TypedActionResult.success(stack);
}
```

Now try starting the game and right clicking with the Lightning Stick. Count how many times you right click it. If you open up your inventory and look at the item again you should see that the usage number has gone up by the amount you clicked it.

![Tooltip showing "Used 8 times"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_3.png)

## Removing the component value {#removing-component-value}

You can also remove a component from your `ItemStack` if it is no longer needed. This is done by using the `remove()` method which takes your component type.

```java
stack.remove(ModItems.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

This method also returns the value of the component before being removed, so you can also use it like so:

```java
int oldCount = stack.remove(ModItems.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

## Advanced Data Components (maps) {#advanced-data-components}

> You may need to store multiple attributes in a single component. As a vanilla example, the `minecraft:food` component stores several values related to food, such as `nutrition`, `saturation`, `eat_seconds` and more. These components are referred to by the game as "map components".

Reviewer: > These components are referred to by the game as "map components"

Are they? Where? If you came up with that name, then I wouldn't say it's very good.

Author: This is based on the error message in the missing components which says `No key temperature in MapLike`. But I couldn't find any official name for them in the announcement or wiki. Would calling them "composite components" be a bit more fitting maybe?

For map components, you must create a `record` class to store the data. This is the type we'll register in our component type and what we'll read and write when interacting with an `ItemStack`. Start by making a new record class in an appropriate package (you might want to make a new one called `component` for this).

```java
public record MyCustomComponent() {
    
}
```

Notice that there's a set of brackets after the class name. This is where we define the list of properties we want our component to have. Let's add a float and a boolean called `temperature` and `burnt` respectively.

```java
public record MyCustomComponent(float temperature, boolean burnt) {
    
}
```

> Since we are defining a custom data structure there won't be a pre-existing `Codec` for our use case like with the [basic component](#basic-data-components). This means we're going to have to construct our own codec. Let's define one in our record class using a `RecordCodecBuilder` which we can reference once we register the component.

Reviewer 3: I think for developers with less experience, it would be helpful to link the codec page here, since the `RecordCodecBuilder` syntax and codec in general can be confusing when seeing it for the first time.

Author: Good idea, I did link to the Codec page earlier but i'll highlight the specific section for Record codec builders

---
title: Custom Data Components
description: Learn how to add custom data to your items using the new 1.20.5 component system.
authors:
  - Romejanic
---

# Custom Data Components {#custom-data-components}

> As your items grow more complex, you may find yourself needing to store custom data associated with your item. The game allows you to store persistent data within an `ItemStack`, and as of 1.20.5 the way we do that is by using **Data Components**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As your items grow more complex, you may find yourself needing to store custom data associated with each item. The game allows you to store persistent data within an `ItemStack`, and as of 1.20.5 the way we do that is by using **Data Components**.
```

> Data Components replace NBT data from previous versions with structured data types (i.e. components) which can be applied to an `ItemStack` to store persistent data about that stack. Data components are namespaced, meaning we can implement our own data components to store custom data about an `ItemStack` and access it later. A full list of the vanilla data components can be found on this [Minecraft wiki page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Data_component_format#List_of_components).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Components replace NBT data from previous versions with structured data types (like components), which can be applied to an `ItemStack` to store persistent data about that stack. Data components are namespaced, meaning we can implement our own data components to store custom data about an `ItemStack` and access it later. A full list of the vanilla data components can be found on this [Minecraft wiki page](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Data_component_format#List_of_components).
```

Author: Would saying something along the lines of "Data Components replace NBT data from previous versions with structured data types _called components_" make more sense?

Author: I decided to remove the bit in brackets since it's just sorta redefining what the components are and is a bit redundant

> Along with registering custom components, this page covers the general usage of the components API which also applies to vanilla components. You can see and access the definitions of all vanilla components in the `DataComponentTypes` class.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Along with registering custom components, this page covers the general usage of the components API, which also applies to vanilla components. You can see and access the definitions of all vanilla components in the `DataComponentTypes` class.
```

## Registering a Component {#registering-a-component}

> As with anything else in your mod you will need to register your custom component using a `ComponentType`. This component type takes a generic argument containing the type of your component's value. We will be focusing on this in more detail further down.

Reviewer 5: I'd argue comments like `We will be focusing on this in more detail further down.` and `(this will be covered briefly later on)` (seen below) don't provide any value to the reader and should be removed. Although this is subjective, so I would like an opinion from the docs team

Reviewer 4: I'd avoid these sentences, but if we have to add them, we should link to a heading (for example "We will focus on this later in [Heading]\(#heading).

Author: Yeah I wanted to focus on showing the basic skeleton of registering a component and then show proper examples later. I can link to the relevant sections if that makes it clearer.

> As with anything else in your mod you will need to register your custom component using a `ComponentType`. This component type takes a generic argument containing the type of your component's value. We will be focusing on this in more detail further down.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As with anything else in your mod, you will need to register your custom component using a `ComponentType`. This component type takes a generic argument containing the type of your component's value. We will be focusing on this in more detail further down.
```

Choose a sensible class to place this in. For this example we're going to make a new package called `component` and a class to contain all of our component types called `ModComponents`. Don't forget to call `ModComponents.initialize()` in your mod initializer.

@[code transcludeWith=::1](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/component/ModComponents.java)

This is the basic template to register a component type:

```java
public static final ComponentType<?> MY_COMPONENT_TYPE = Registry.register(
    Registries.DATA_COMPONENT_TYPE,
    Identifier.of(FabricDocsReference.MOD_ID, "my_component"),
    ComponentType.<?>builder().codec(null).build()
);
```

> There's a few things here worth noting. On the first and fourth lines you can see a `?`. This will be replaced with the type of your component's value. We'll fill this in soon.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are a few things here worth noting. On the first and fourth lines, you can see a `?`. This will be replaced with the type of your component's value. We'll fill this in soon.
```

> Secondly, similar to registering a block or item you must provide an `Identifier` containing the intended ID of your component. This is namespaced with your mod's mod ID.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Secondly, you must provide an `Identifier` containing the intended ID of your component. This is namespaced with your mod's mod ID.
```

> Lastly we have a `ComponentType.Builder` which creates the actual `ComponentType` instance which is being registered. This contains another cruical detail we will need to discuss which is your component's `Codec`. This is currently `null` but we will also fill it in soon.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Lastly, we have a `ComponentType.Builder` that creates the actual `ComponentType` instance that's being registered. This contains another crucial detail we will need to discuss: your component's `Codec`. This is currently `null` but we will also fill it in soon.
```

## Basic Data Components {#basic-data-components}

> Basic data components (e.g. `minecraft:damage`) consist of a single data value, such as an `int`, `float`, `boolean` or `String`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Basic data components (like `minecraft:damage`) consist of a single data value, such as an `int`, `float`, `boolean` or `String`.
```

> As an example, let's create an `Integer` value which will track how many times the player has right-clicked while holding our item. Let's update our component registration to the following:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As an example, let's create an `Integer` value that will track how many times the player has right-clicked while holding our item. Let's update our component registration to the following:
```

@[code transcludeWith=::2](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/component/ModComponents.java)

> You can see that we're now passing `<Integer>` as our generic type, indicating that this component will be stored as a single `int` value. For our codec, we are using the provided `Codec.INT` codec. We can get away with using basic codecs for simple components like this but more complex scenarios might require a custom codec (this will be covered briefly later on).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can see that we're now passing `<Integer>` as our generic type, indicating that this component will be stored as a single `int` value. For our codec, we are using the provided `Codec.INT` codec. We can get away with using basic codecs for simple components like this, but more complex scenarios might require a custom codec (this will be covered briefly later on).
```

> If you start the game you should be able to enter a command like so:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you start the game, you should be able to enter a command like this:
```

> ![Give command showing custom component](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_0.png)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
![`/give` command showing the custom component](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_0.png)
```

> When you run the command you should recieve the item containing the component. However we are not currently using our component to do anything useful. Let's start by reading the value of the component in a way we can see.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When you run the command you should receive the item containing the component. However we are not currently using our component to do anything useful. Let's start by reading the value of the component in a way we can see.
```

> When you run the command you should recieve the item containing the component. However we are not currently using our component to do anything useful. Let's start by reading the value of the component in a way we can see.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you run the command, you should receive the item containing the component. However, we are not currently using our component to do anything useful. Let's start by reading the value of the component in a way we can see.
```

## Reading component value {#reading-component-value}

> Let's add a new item which will increase the counter each time it is right clicked. You should read the [Custom Item Interactions](./custom-item-interactions.md) page which will cover the techniques we will use in this guide.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's add a new item that will increase the counter each time it is right-clicked. You should read the [Custom Item Interactions](./custom-item-interactions) page, which will cover the techniques we will use in this guide.
```

@[code transcludeWith=::1](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/custom/CounterItem.java)

Remember as usual to register the item in your `ModItems` class.

```java
public static final Item COUNTER = register(new CounterItem(
    new Item.Settings()
), "counter");
```

We're going to add some tooltip code to display the current value of the click count when we hover over our item in the inventory. We can use the `get()` method on our `ItemStack` to get our component value like so:

```java
int clickCount = stack.get(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

> This will return the current component value as the type which we defined when we registered our component. We can then use this value to add a tooltip entry. Add this line to the `appendTooltip` method in the `CounterItem` class:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This will return the current component value as the type we defined when we registered our component. We can then use this value to add a tooltip entry. Add this line to the `appendTooltip` method in the `CounterItem` class:
```

```java
public void appendTooltip(ItemStack stack, TooltipContext context, List<Text> tooltip, TooltipType type) {
    int count = stack.get(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
    tooltip.add(Text.translatable("item.fabric-docs-reference.counter.info", count).formatted(Formatting.GOLD));
}
```

Don't forget to update your lang file (`/assets/<mod id>/lang/en_us.json`) and add these two lines:

```json
{
    "item.fabric-docs-reference.counter": "Counter",
    "item.fabric-docs-reference.counter.info": "Used %1$s times",
}
```

Start up the game and run this command to give yourself a new Counter item with a count of 5.

```
/give @p fabric-docs-reference:counter[fabric-docs-reference:click_count=5]
```

> When you hover over this item in your inventory you should see the count displayed in the tooltip!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you hover over this item in your inventory, you should see the count displayed in the tooltip!
```

![Tooltip showing "Used 5 times"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_1.png)

However, if you give yourself a new Counter item _without_ the custom component, the game will crash when you hover over the item in your inventory. You should see an error like this in the crash report:

> ```txt

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```log
```

java.lang.NullPointerException: Cannot invoke "java.lang.Integer.intValue()" because the return value of "net.minecraft.item.ItemStack.get(net.minecraft.component.ComponentType)" is null
        at com.example.docs.item.custom.CounterItem.appendTooltip(LightningStick.java:45)
        at net.minecraft.item.ItemStack.getTooltip(ItemStack.java:767)
```

As expected, since the `ItemStack` doesn't currently contain an instance of our custom component, calling `stack.get()` with our component type will return `null`. 

There are three solutions we can use to address this problem.

### Setting a default component value {#setting-default-value}

> When you register your item and pass a `Item.Settings` object to your item constructor, you can also provide a list of default components which are applied to all new items. If we go back to our `ModItems` class to where we register the `CounterItem`, we can add a default value for our custom component.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you register your item and pass a `Item.Settings` object to your item constructor, you can also provide a list of default components that are applied to all new items. If we go back to our `ModItems` class, where we register the `CounterItem`, we can add a default value for our custom component.
```

@[code transcludeWith=::_13](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/ModItems.java)

> When a new item is created it will automatically apply our custom component with the given value.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a new item is created, it will automatically apply our custom component with the given value.
```

::: warning
Using commands, it is possible to remove a default component from an `ItemStack`. You should refer to the next two sections to properly handle a scenario where the component is not present on your item.
:::

### Reading with a default value {#reading-default-value}

> In addition, when reading the component value we can use the `getOrDefault()` method on our `ItemStack` object to return a specified default value if the component is not present on the stack. This will safeguard against any errors resulting from a missing component. We can adjust our tooltip code like so:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition, when reading the component value, we can use the `getOrDefault()` method on our `ItemStack` object to return a specified default value if the component is not present on the stack. This will safeguard against any errors resulting from a missing component. We can adjust our tooltip code like so:
```

```java
int clickCount = stack.getOrDefault(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT, 0);
```

> As you can see this method takes two arguments, our component type like before and a default value to return if the component is not present.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As you can see, this method takes two arguments: our component type like before, and a default value to return if the component is not present.
```

### Checking if a component exists {#checking-if-component-exists}

> You can also check for the existance of a specific component on an `ItemStack` using the `contains()` method. This takes the component type as an argument and returns `true` or `false` depending on whether the stack contains that component.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can also check for the existence of a specific component on an `ItemStack` using the `contains()` method. This takes the component type as an argument and returns `true` or `false` depending on whether the stack contains that component.
```

```java
boolean exists = stack.contains(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

### Fixing the error {#fixing-the-error}

Let's combine those two solutions. So we will read the value with a default value of `0`, but we'll also hide the tooltip if the component is not present on the stack.

@[code transcludeWith=::3](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/custom/CounterItem.java)

> If you implement both of these solutions and hover over the item without the component you should see that it displays "Used 0 times" and no longer crashes the game.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you implement both of these solutions and hover over the item without the component, you should see that it displays "Used 0 times" and no longer crashes the game.
```

![Tooltip showing "Used 0 times"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_2.png)

Try giving yourself a Counter with our custom component removed. You can use this command to do so:

```
/give @p fabric-docs-reference:counter[!fabric-docs-reference:click_count]
```

> When hovering over this item the tooltip should be missing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When hovering over this item, the tooltip should be missing.
```

![Counter item with no tooltip](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_7.png)

## Updating component value {#setting-component-value}

Now let's try updating our component value. We're going to increase the click count each time we use our Counter item. To change the value of a component on an `ItemStack` we use the `set()` method like so:

```java
stack.set(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT, newValue);
```

> This takes our component type and the value we want to set it to. In this case it will be our new click count.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This takes our component type and the value we want to set it to. In this case, it will be our new click count.
```

> Let's set up a new `use()` method to read the old click count, increase it by one and then set the updated click count.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's set up a new `use()` method to read the old click count, increase it by one, and then set the updated click count.
```

@[code transcludeWith=::2](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/custom/CounterItem.java)

> Now try starting the game and right clicking with the Counter. Count how many times you right click it. If you open up your inventory and look at the item again you should see that the usage number has gone up by the amount you clicked it.

Reviewer 5: A few things to point out here:
1) A consistency issue: "right click" vs "right-click"
2) A grammatical issue: "you clicked it". Since the action in the past (clicking the item) has a result in the present (the counter now displays a higher value) we should use "you've clicked it" instead
3) "by the amount you clicked it" probably should be "by the amount of times you've clicked it"
4) Subjective: the sentences repeat something obvious. For example, "Count how many times you right click it." is obvious, given that we are developing a counter. I would remove this sentence. "If you open up your inventory and look at the item again..." should be "If you look at the item's tooltip (again)..." (the "again" also seems unnecessary, but I'm not certain on whether to keep it)

> Now try starting the game and right clicking with the Counter. Count how many times you right click it. If you open up your inventory and look at the item again you should see that the usage number has gone up by the amount you clicked it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now try starting the game and right-clicking with the Counter, and keep count of how many times you do so. If you were to check the item's tooltip, you should see that the usage number has gone up by the amount of times you've clicked.
```

![Tooltip showing "Used 8 times"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_3.png)

## Removing component value {#removing-component-value}

> You can also remove a component from your `ItemStack` if it is no longer needed. This is done by using the `remove()` method which takes your component type.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can also remove a component from your `ItemStack` if it is no longer needed. This is done by using the `remove()` method, which takes in your component type.
```

```java
stack.remove(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

> This method also returns the value of the component before being removed, so you can also use it like so:

Reviewer 5: This fact can also be mentioned in the section with the `.set` method

```java
int oldCount = stack.remove(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

## Advanced Data Components {#advanced-data-components}

You may need to store multiple attributes in a single component. As a vanilla example, the `minecraft:food` component stores several values related to food, such as `nutrition`, `saturation`, `eat_seconds` and more. In this guide we'll refer to them as "composite" components.

For composite components, you must create a `record` class to store the data. This is the type we'll register in our component type and what we'll read and write when interacting with an `ItemStack`. Start by making a new record class in the `component` package we made earlier.

```java
public record MyCustomComponent() {
    
}
```

> Notice that there's a set of brackets after the class name. This is where we define the list of properties we want our component to have. Let's add a float and a boolean called `temperature` and `burnt` respectively.

Reviewer 5: The usage of records is basic Java knowledge, should it be explained here?

Author: I think yes. I think a lot of Java developers still aren't aware records exist since they were added in Java 14. And it's a very brief description anyway

Reviewer 5: That's fair, this can be kept

Since we are defining a custom data structure there won't be a pre-existing `Codec` for our use case like with the [basic component](#basic-data-components). This means we're going to have to construct our own codec. Let's define one in our record class using a `RecordCodecBuilder` which we can reference once we register the component. For more details on using a `RecordCodecBuilder` you can refer to [this section of the Codecs page](../codecs.md#merging-codecs-for-record-like-classes).

@[code transcludeWith=::2](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/component/MyCustomComponent.java)

You can see that we are defining a list of custom fields based on the primitive `Codec` types. However we are also telling it what our fields are called using `fieldOf()`, and then using `forGetter()` to tell the game which attribute of our record to populate.

You can also define optional fields by using `optionalFieldOf()` and passing a default value as the second argument. Any fields not marked optional will be required when setting the component using `/give` so make sure you mark any optional arguments as such when creating your codec.

> Finally we call `apply()` and pass our record's constructor. For more details on how to construct codecs and more advanced use cases be sure to read the [Codecs](../codecs.md) page.

Reviewer 5: Seems like all of this is already explained in the Codecs page. Is it worth repeating it here?

Reviewer 3: I think so, users are much more likely to know about and search for a "custom components" page than a "codec" page which new devs and regular players would have no idea about.

Reviewer 2: Yup this is fine, if users want to do more advanced stuff they can look at the wider codec page.

```mcfunction
/give @p fabric-docs-reference:counter[!fabric-docs-reference:click_count]
```

When hovering over this item the tooltip should be missing.

![Counter item with no tooltip](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_7.png)

## Updating Component Value {#setting-component-value}

Now let's try updating our component value. We're going to increase the click count each time we use our Counter item. To change the value of a component on an `ItemStack` we use the `set()` method like so:

```java
stack.set(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT, newValue);
```

This takes our component type and the value we want to set it to. In this case it will be our new click count. This method also returns the old value of the component (if one is present) which may be useful in some situations. For example:

```java
int oldValue = stack.set(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT, newValue);
```

Let's set up a new `use()` method to read the old click count, increase it by one and then set the updated click count.

@[code transcludeWith=::2](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/item/custom/CounterItem.java)

> Now try starting the game and right-clicking with the Counter item in your hand. If you open up your inventory and look at the item again you should see that the usage number has gone up by the amount of times you clicked it.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Now try starting the game and right-clicking with the Counter item in your hand. If you open up your inventory and look at the item again you should see that the usage number has gone up by the amount of times you've clicked it.
```

![Tooltip showing "Used 8 times"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_3.png)

## Removing Component Value {#removing-component-value}

You can also remove a component from your `ItemStack` if it is no longer needed. This is done by using the `remove()` method which takes your component type.

```java
stack.remove(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

This method also returns the value of the component before being removed, so you can also use it like so:

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This method also returns the value of the component before being removed, so you can also use it as follows:
```

```java
int oldCount = stack.remove(ModComponents.CLICK_COUNT_COMPONENT);
```

## Advanced Data Components {#advanced-data-components}

You may need to store multiple attributes in a single component. As a vanilla example, the `minecraft:food` component stores several values related to food, such as `nutrition`, `saturation`, `eat_seconds` and more. In this guide we'll refer to them as "composite" components.

For composite components, you must create a `record` class to store the data. This is the type we'll register in our component type and what we'll read and write when interacting with an `ItemStack`. Start by making a new record class in the `component` package we made earlier.

```java
public record MyCustomComponent() {

}
```

Notice that there's a set of brackets after the class name. This is where we define the list of properties we want our component to have. Let's add a float and a boolean called `temperature` and `burnt` respectively.

> @[code transcludeWith=::1](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/component/MyCustomComponent.java)

Reviewer 5: There is an inconsistent use of
```java
public record Stuff(...) {

}
```
and
```java
public record Stuff(...) {
}
```
(note the newline inside the record)

Author: fixed

> Since we are defining a custom data structure there won't be a pre-existing `Codec` for our use case like with the [basic component](#basic-data-components). This means we're going to have to construct our own codec. Let's define one in our record class using a `RecordCodecBuilder` which we can reference once we register the component. For more details on using a `RecordCodecBuilder` you can refer to [this section of the Codecs page](../codecs#merging-codecs-for-record-like-classes).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since we are defining a custom data structure, there won't be a pre-existing `Codec` for our use case like with the [basic component](#basic-data-components). This means we're going to have to construct our own codec. Let's define one in our record class using a `RecordCodecBuilder` which we can reference once we register the component. For more details on using a `RecordCodecBuilder` you can refer to [this section of the Codecs page](../codecs#merging-codecs-for-record-like-classes).
```

@[code transcludeWith=::2](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/component/MyCustomComponent.java)

> You can see that we are defining a list of custom fields based on the primitive `Codec` types. However we are also telling it what our fields are called using `fieldOf()`, and then using `forGetter()` to tell the game which attribute of our record to populate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can see that we are defining a list of custom fields based on the primitive `Codec` types. However, we are also telling it what our fields are called using `fieldOf()`, and then using `forGetter()` to tell the game which attribute of our record to populate.
```

You can also define optional fields by using `optionalFieldOf()` and passing a default value as the second argument. Any fields not marked optional will be required when setting the component using `/give` so make sure you mark any optional arguments as such when creating your codec.

> Finally we call `apply()` and pass our record's constructor. For more details on how to construct codecs and more advanced use cases be sure to read the [Codecs](../codecs) page.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Finally, we call `apply()` and pass our record's constructor. For more details on how to construct codecs and more advanced use cases, be sure to read the [Codecs](../codecs) page.
```

Registering a composite component is similar to before. We just pass our record class as the generic type, and our custom `Codec` to the `codec()` method.

@[code transcludeWith=::3](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/component/ModComponents.java)

> Now start the game. Using the `/give` command try applying the component. Composite component values are passed as an object enclosed with `{}`. If you put blank curly brackets you'll see an error telling you that the required key `temperature` is missing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now start the game. Using the `/give` command, try applying the component. Composite component values are passed as an object enclosed with `{}`. If you put blank curly brackets, you'll see an error telling you that the required key `temperature` is missing.
```

![Give command showing missing key "temperature"](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_4.png)

> Add a temperature value to the object using the syntax `temperature:8.2`. You can also optionally pass a value for `burnt` using the same syntax but either `true` or `false`. You should now see the command is valid and you can give yourself an item containing the component.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Add a temperature value to the object using the syntax `temperature:8.2`. You can also optionally pass a value for `burnt` using the same syntax but either `true` or `false`. You should now see that the command is valid, and can give you an item containing the component.
```

![Valid give command showing both properties](/assets/develop/items/custom_component_5.png)

### Getting, Setting and Removing Advanced Components {#getting-setting-removing-advanced-comps}

> Using the component in code is the same as before. Using `stack.get()` will return an instance of your `record` class which you can then use to read the values. Since records are read-only, you will need to create a new instance of your record to update the values.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using the component in code is the same as before. Using `stack.get()` will return an instance of your `record` class, which you can then use to read the values. Since records are read-only, you will need to create a new instance of your record to update the values.
```

```java
// read values of component
MyCustomComponent comp = stack.get(ModComponents.MY_CUSTOM_COMPONENT);
float temp = comp.temperature();
boolean burnt = comp.burnt();

// set new component values
stack.set(ModComponents.MY_CUSTOM_COMPONENT, new MyCustomComponent(8.4f, true));

// check for component

> if(stack.contains(ModComponents.MY_CUSTOM_COMPONENT)) {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
if (stack.contains(ModComponents.MY_CUSTOM_COMPONENT)) {
```
